11:01 PM
Dikshit exhorts Cong workers to ensure party returns to power at Centre
Delhi Congress president and the party's candidate from North East Delhi in the Lok Sabha polls Sheila Dikshit asked party workers on Saturday to ensure the grand old party's victory in the ongoing election in order to save the country. Campaigning in the North East Delhi constituency, Dikshit exuded confidence that she will defeat her opponents and the Congress will win all the seven Lok Sabha seats in the national capital. "I have not come here to seek votes for myself. I want the party workers to take the message of Congress president Rahul Gandhi to the people and ensure the victory of the party to save the country," the former Delhi chief minister said after inaugurating her election office at Burari. All the good things in the country like good healthcare and education facilities, increased air connectivity and automobiles happened due to the policies and programmes of the previous Congress governments, she said.
10:13 PM
Congress threatens to move Supreme Court over re-poll in 'rigged' Lok Sabha seat in Tripura
The opposition Congress in Tripura on Saturday threatened to move the Supreme Court if re-poll is not ordered in at least 850 polling stations of the total 1679 in West Tripura Lok Sabha constituency where polling was held on April 11. Opposition parties like the Congress and the CPI(M) have alleged large scale rigging by the ruling BJP in West Tripura seat and demanded repoll in many booths. "We have information from reliable sources that the EC is under pressure from the ruling BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi to order re-poll in only a few polling stations," state Congress vice-president Pijush Biswas told a press conference here.
10:10 PM
Bihar: Prakash Raj, Independent candidate from Bengaluru Central LS seat and Bollywood lyricist Javed Akhtar campaigned for CPI candidate Kanhaiya Kumar at a public rally in Begusarai, earlier today. Kanhaiya Kumar is contesting from Begusarai parliamentary constituency.
